[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: I bow to the
mothers of Bhakti, the saints
of mystic yoga, who blew
the seeds of divine love
into the hearts of women
all over the world.
I bow to those saints who
struggled and sacrificed
and paved the way for all
women to attain pure devotion.
Many of them will
never be known.
This is a tribute to them,
the unsung heroines of Bhakti.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We are here to serve
and uplift the world.
A heart filled with love,
connected with the divine
can reach out to everyone.
Divine love is
the greatest love.
The saints of mystic yoga speak
of a beloved deep within souls.
I want to reawaken
that relationship.
Then Bhakti can flow
through my heart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Bhakti is really an inherit
response of being alive,
that is a natural flow, that
we can cultivate no matter
what background we're
from, no matter what
our spiritual orientation is.
We feel that connection,
that union with ourselves,
with a divine
presence, with others.
It doesn't need to be
an Eastern practice.
Practice of Bhakti is the
practice of unconditional love.
It allows you to realize that
there's beauty and there's joy
and there's divinity
in everything
if you just look for it.
For me, Bhakti is the
heart, the core, of who
we are as people, as beings.
There's a piece of
divine in all us.
And we just need to uncover it.
We just need to remember it.
Once you get on the path,
once you start to realize
that everything is
centered around a divinity,
you can't run anywhere
except into divinity.
You can run your eyes closed and
you'll never run off the path.
Bhakti is energy.
It's the energy of love.
And love has its source in God.
God is love.
Love is God.
You're tapping in to
the greatest reservoir
of energy, which is love.
So with every person,
whether they're rich or poor,
whatever color,
nationality they are,
I strive to remember that
they want to be loved.
SHARON GANNON: You
enter into a mood
of receptivity, of surrender.
And you listen for what God
might want to say to you.
You listen for a
message from God.
To be a woman of Bhakti,
a woman of devotion,
doesn't mean that
you're perfect.
But you are in a dialogue,
in a heartfelt dialogue.
Unless you understand
a woman's nature,
you can't really
understand Bhakti.
But it's a female principle.
And the female principle is
that nourishing principle,
that giving principal,
that affection principle.
And that is, in the first
stage of every human
being is the mother.
For those people that grow
up in the Bhakti tradition,
the mother is probably one
of the most important people.
I mean, any good quality that
I have, it came from my mom.
And so from the time that
we wake up in the morning,
my mom would wake us
up and you meditate.
And that's start your day.
And you go through
it from there.
I have to say that my
mother was my first guru.
She put me on the
spiritual path.
She made things fun for me.
My mother made the practice of
Bhakti, a devotional life, fun
for me.
I think they had a very
happy childhood in Bhakti.
It was totally--
Bhakti was the thread
that ran through their life.
If you look throughout the
[INAUDIBLE], about the Vedas,
women are always glorified
as being more devotional,
thinking less with their head
and more with their heart
about their devotion,
more eager to just
throw aside rules and just do
what's right from the heart.
Devotion to my yoga
practice, devotion
to my teachers, devotion to
God, it's devotion to something
other than me, me, me, me, me.
Devotional service is selfless.
It's completely
just, I want make
this person happy and in
connection with the Lord.
You need to make that choice.
I'm choosing to be a giver.
I'm choosing to be kinder.
I'm choosing to be more loving.
I feel very, very grateful
that Bhakti yoga is becoming
something that is not
strange to Westerners,
but really is a healing path.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As long as you're living
Bhakti, you give Bhakti.
So anybody who lives it
with some seriousness
and some sincerity,
then they automatically
give that to others.
And in that, and just
doing your path to Bhakti,
I see others see that.
And they want to join and do it.
Instead of saying,
you need to do this,
they see how happy
it makes all of us,
how healthy and conscious.
And people want to
be a part of that.
Just like a yoga practice
or a singing practice
or a instrument practice,
that faith and feeling
the unconditional
love from the source,
like any other practice, the
more we do it, the better at it
we get.
That's what the
practice is for.
That's what having a
daily [INAUDIBLE] is.
A daily conscious
practice is for me
to connect with my heart.
One major practice I
have is daily meditation.
And I meditate on
the names of God
in an ancient
practice called Japa.
Japa beads are used for prayer
and associating with God
through his holy names.
To experience Bhakti,
the most beautiful thing
is Japa, because
Japa is something
you can use your own body, your
own mind, and your own words,
and transform them.
You make that connection,
and that conscious connection,
your foundation.
And the whole rest of
the day is different.
And the whole rest of your
lifestyle is different.
And your whole connections
with other people
is different, which
makes them connect
with others differently.
So that foundation, as little
or as large as it may be,
can transform innumerable
different ways.
I start it like a
very regular practice
that I do every single
morning where I just
ask to be made an instrument.
I lift up my hands.
And I asked God to make an
instrument for his will.
RUKMINI WALKER: Only with
that mood of I have nothing,
but I have you.
That I'm yours, this is Bhakti.
I'm a pilgrim here.
I'm walking through this world.
And today or tomorrow
I'll be gone.
But that offering is eternal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Kirtan allows you to open up
almost more than anything else.
It starts the process
of Bhakti almost quicker
than any other form.
Kirtan has become the
pathway in for so many
Western yoga practitioners.
I think it's so fast and
so efficient as a tool.
For me, Bhakti just
means Kirtan and trying
to connect with the
holy name and the deeper
meaning of the name.
I feel like I go beyond myself.
I will beyond the room.
Kirtan is such a specific,
different form of praise.
And it's-- it's just-- it
just lights you up, man.
Through sound we can reach
our true-- our true nature.
The mantra, vibration,
and you interact.
In other words, as you
sing it, then you're
gonna be pulled up into a
different energy that basically
has infinite possibility in it.
A lot of Americans
call it therapy.
But it's way beyond
therapy-- way beyond therapy.
There's living
imprints that happen
in the heart and the
mind that transform you.
I'd never experienced that.
I wanted to run for my life.
I was like, where's the
plane to leave my life?
I didn't know how I
was going to live.
It was devastation
on that level.
And I would just sing
[INAUDIBLE], you know?
And I would just keep
planting that seed.
And I use those words to replace
the other nasty words that were
going on in my head, you know,
words of blame or depression
or other feelings that I
didn't want to cultivate.
What we do is we
gather together
and we chant of
the names of God.
And in a sense, it's actually
calling out just like you'd
call out to a loved one.
You're saying their
name over and over.
If we offer our Kirtanas
to God, then God is pleased.
But it should be with
love from the heart,
not only from the tongue.
TULASI NADIA HARRISON:
Kirtan pierces your heart.
Kirtan really goes right
into the center and stays.
And every time you do
Kirtan it builds up.
And then eventually
the love bursts.
You end up giving
Kirtan to others.
So even when people
come who've never
sung before in their lives,
or say you know, I can't sing.
You know, I have-- I'm
tone deaf and somebody told
me not to sing when I was in the
sixth grade chorus or whatever.
I say, this is different.
Everyone can sing God's name.
But even in ancient
times that, even
in the past few
hundred years in India,
ladies come together
and do Kirtan.
They have their ladies'
Kirtan and they come together.
It's said that women
relax by talking.
Sometimes men just
keep it all inside.
But when women come
together who are
longing for deep spirituality,
it can be very, very profound.
And Bhakti can be
the way and the goal
because you don't need
anything more than Bhakti.
It's not a way to something.
It can be a goal in itself.
And many devotees have said,
I don't want anything else.
I just want to sing about the
Supreme and be here forever.
And I think that from
that perspective,
this life is not bondage.
Its freedom.
This is moksha, to be
singing about the Supreme.
What more do you want?
You don't need to be in heaven.
You don't need to be in
any results exalted state.
When you hear about Bhakti
from the right source,
then you get an idea of
the greatness of Bhakti.
And that is amazing in that
it isn't something-- well,
I've heard that.
It's over.
The more you hear
about Bhakti, the more
you want to know about Bhakti.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
[NON-ENGLISH CHANTING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the interesting
things about Bhakti
is that all of the
forms of Ishwar
are accompanied by
a female consort.
So Shiva and Parvati,
Lakshmi and Narayana,
and Radha Krishna and Sitaram.
So Godhead, then in
the Bhakti traditions,
is almost always
conceived of has
a complimentary pair, who are
two, but one, at the same time.
On the path of Bhakti there
is the lover and the beloved.
And we understand that
there is no more powerful
force in all of the spiritual
or material existence than love.
So there's this love affair
at the center all existence.
How beautiful is that?
Not some kind of
void or nothingness,
but a love affair at the
very center of existence.
And we're part of that.
The real story is that every
soul is united to the Supreme
like a bride.
Every one of us is the
beloved of the Supreme One.
Because soul not
Indian and not Western.
Soul is the soul.
And soul and God is a very,
very, very good connection.
Always.
Just like a snowflake, that
each and every snowflake is
individual, unique, and sacred.
And that each one of us
in our intrinsic identity
is unique, sacred, personal.
[NON-ENGLISH CHANTING]
If you have love, even though
the Lord is unattainable,
like so many [NON-ENGLISH].
All the devas are
trying to find them,
but they can't find the end.
But if you have love and
devotion, then that one who's
unattainable, who is
beyond name, beyond form,
the essence of the Vedas,
who has become everything,
but is under the influence of
his bhaktas, of his followers.
PRANADA COMTOIS: There
is a certain type
of love that is only for God, a
selfless love and a whole love
and a fully-giving yourself
love that's only for God.
And I mistook that love for
being appropriate for men.
And I lost personal boundaries.
And I think a lot
of women do this.
They love so wholly and so
fully, with so much heart,
they could even lose themselves.
So I've lost myself
in relationships
and have come to understand
that that selfless love is
precious and is only for God.
Not that I can't express
deep, profound love
for other human beings,
which I do feel I have
and I do express.
But there's a certain
love that is only for God
and can only be truly
reciprocated by God.
I've been 44 years practicing
Bhakti yoga every day.
Every day I can say that.
And every day it's richer.
There's just-- we have so
many ups and downs in life.
We climb hills and go through
valleys and in and out.
But I can say that
Bhakti yoga is
a shelter and a foundation
that allows one to take
these things with grace.
So it's very powerful.
It's a nugget that you
think is very small.
But it's actually a
great, great jewel.
And Bhakti is service
to God, service to man,
service to self.
It's very powerful.
Wherever you catch
a drop of it-- here,
there, anywhere-- it's very
relevant to the lives of
ordinary people like you and I.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: I bow to the women
of Bhakti whose hearts overflow
with divine love.
May our hearts
become like there's.
May our world
become transformed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SIGNING]